content/posts/previousWork.md, before:

---
title: "Work Experience"
date: 2019-07-05T15:27:11-04:00
draft: false
type: "page"
---

#### Toptal - Software Engineer _<small>Sep 2016 – Ongoing</small>_

- Architected earthquake detection systems for Rio Tinto's Mongolian mine Oyu Tolgoi, one of the largest mines in the world
  - Worked directly with seismologists and on-site personel to build python pipelines deployed on kubernetes
- Drove the creation of a new revenue stream forjuice bar chain puregreen by building full stack system to create, manage, and execute subscriptions
  - Used django, react, and redux. Integrated directly with payment provider and distribution partner
  - https://www.puregreen.com
- Implemented data collection systems for financial analysis product wavebasis and integrated payment provider for subscriptions

---

#### Airbrake.io - Software Engineer _<small>Sep 2016 – Jan 2018</small>_

- Worked in Go improving and maintaining distributed systems code that accepted and ingested large quantites (~10 mill/day data points) of error data. 
- Built front facing features in Javascript and Typescript using AngularJS, focused on improving user flows linking error data to deploys.

---

#### Sozo App - Technical Lead _<small>Apr 2016 – Aug 2016</small>_
- Built web scraping infrastructure collecting product data from various grocery providers 
- Managed development efforts from other contractors and integrated resulting work 
- Developed integrations for operational tooling, including error, metrics and log management solutions.

---

#### AppMonsta - Distributed System Engineer _<small>Sep 2015 – Mar 2016</small>_
- Built spark (python) pipelines processing > 200 million unique data points per day 
- Improved and maintained high performance python web spiders scraping > 1 million items a day

---

#### Spring Inc. - Contract Software Engineer _<small>Mar 2015 – May 2015</small>_
Helped the company scale their web scraping infrastructure by building critical components with golang

---

#### Rockpool Labs - Engineer _<small>Sep 2014 – Jan 2015</small>_
- Worked with golang on google app engine building high performance, auto-scaling services 
- Built out core service libraries, including logging, error handling and others critical componentry

---

#### Aston Club - Senior Software Engineer _<small>Nov 2013 – Sep 2014</small>_
- Initiated and won internal support for a set of nodejs-based software development best practises that minimised duplication of work. This became the lynch-pin for the refactoring of internal code and a key part of the company's plans to tackle problems of scale.
- Championed a complete switch in infrastructure management to ansible, re-writing deployment, testing, and development procedures to increase productivity.
- Played a part in developing a custom auto-updater in C# and .NET, getting up to speed quickly with the evil land of microsoft (perhaps learning it's not so evil). 
- Developed a new POS integration that increased the total number of active venues (at the time) by 10%.
- Wrote a communications library to drastically simplify the methods of inter-service message routing through message brokers (Rabbitmq).

---

#### Self-Employed - Contractor _<small>Apr 2013 – Nov 2013</small>_
- Used nodejs and raspberry pis to develop a prototype for a startup looking to improve communications/analysis of hockey players and coaches. This helped them raise $75k in initial funding.
- Built a Ruby-based administration tool for developers and surfaced valuable information about users/systems for an education-based startup.
- Prototyped the frontend (angularjs) for a startup optimising the renovation process.
- Built out a carousel style view component (js/html/css) with heavy backbone usage.
- Converted a phonegap-based app to a native iOS app.

---

#### Better Place Australia - Software Developer (Co-op) _<small>May 2012 – Jul 2012</small>_
- Prototyped an IOS application to give the company's customers direct feedback about the Better Place Network
- Designed and built the early mobile client API for communicating with the Better Place Network, utilizing the Typesafe stack, Salesforce, and MongoDB.
- Improved and maintained internal tools that directly affected the workflow of employees testing devices in the field.

---

#### Electronic Arts - Software Developer (Co-op) _<small>Sep 2011 – Dec 2011</small>_
- Worked closely in a team of developers, artists, and economists to develop "Trouble Makers", an iphone game that was played by tens of thousands of users.
- Contributed to all layers of the application, from server to UI to tools.
- Added new features, fixed bugs, and pushed development towards a polished finished product.
- Worked with Unity 3d and C# on the client end in addition to Java on the backend.
- http://www.ea.com/trouble-makers-ios

---

#### Reindeer Flotilla - Founder and Sole Developer _<small>Jan 2011 – Apr 2011</small>_
- Founded a small business creating flash games for the web. 
- Led a remote team of 5 people across 9 time zones to build Sapphire Skies, an action game with stragic elements that has been played 9,400 times to date.
- Coded all elements of the game, from UI to backend, integrating open source technology.
- Utilized a small test group to make informed improvements based on analytics.
- http://www.kongregate.com/games/zachgold/sapphire-skies

---

#### Hitgrab Inc - Games Developer (Co-op) _<small>May 2010 – Sep 2010</small>_
- Helped to drive the conceptualization, development and analysis of a flash based facebook game. 
- Contributed to all layers of application, creating code on the PHP-based backend and the Actionscript frontend.
- Got up to speed with PHP and acted to rapidly help meet goals when a lack of backend resources created a bottleneck in development.

---

#### Fantasy Interactive - Interactive Development Intern (Co-op) _<small>Sep 2009 – Dec 2009</small>_
- Worked alongside seasoned industry experts on projects for major clients (Electronic Arts and Burton).
- Created CSS and HTML widgets that formed the basis of a community-based portal website.
- Brainstormed and designed wireframes that were used to create the Kontain (FI’s home-grown social network) iphone app. 
- Worked in Flash to rapidly create an application for Burton Snowboards that would interactively reveal portion of a map with smoothly animated movements.

---

#### Research In Motion - Prototype Software Developer (Co-op) _<small>May 2009 – Aug 2009</small>_
- Architected the front-end development of a major conceptual prototype intended to explore new uses of advanced user interfaces. 
- Worked closely with a team of hardware engineers, graphic designers, and industrial designers to develop software to create a cutting-edge product concept.

---

#### DesignAxiom Ltd. - Software Developer (Co-op) _<small>Sep 2008 – Dec 2008</small>_
- Learnt an in-house flash development framework and applied knowledge to contribute major deliverables in the development of a complex flex application for a pharmaceutical analytics company.
- Contributed to an intricate flex application in the children’s entertainment sector. 
- Created JSFL scripts to simplify animation tasks and solve interaction problems between animations and the flex application. 
- Added features to a a desktop-based educational video player 
- Fixed bugs with a facebook-based flash game.

---

#### Autodesk - Software Developer (Co-op) _<small>Jan 2008 – May 2008</small>_
- Created a java-based web tool for a project management system that increased usability and saved employees considerable amounts of time each day. 
- Gained experience with administration of the perforce source control system. 
- Created python scripts to automate processes in perforce.

Commit message:

Update site with bramble/artery details Tune typo in toptal work history notes

content/posts/previousWork.md, after:

---
title: "Work Experience"
date: 2019-07-05T15:27:11-04:00
draft: false
type: "page"
---

#### Bramble & Artery - Director of Engineering _<small>Aug 2019 – Aug 2022</small>_

- Led the technical transformation of Artery, a platform to co-organise intimate cultural events, to Bramble, a dynamic virtual meetings product during the tumultuous coronavirus era.
- Worked in tight collaboration to prototype a speculative product with dynamic videoconferencing elements, leading to around a million dollars in funding.
- Built engineering team from two engineers to a team of twelve, designing the hiring process from scratch. Established critical partnerships with a network of independent contractors to accelerate development and fill gaps in specialised expertise.
- Worked directly with founders to set the technical roadmap and regularly prepared development reports to communicate progress across the team. Pushed to stabilise a high-velocity cadence, regularly deploying new features and fixes.
- Introduced automated deployments, testing strategies, code review and other technical process into the team, improving the reliability of deployments and reducing regressions.
- Experimented with a variety of management techniques to "steer the ship" on the technical team, continually seeking to improve the health and growth of the team.
- Pushed to improve non-technical process, introducing a lightweight scoping strategy based off Basecamp's shaping documents. Deployed and fine-tuned this process on over a dozen major projects.
- Led from the front, reviewing and writing code, monitoring and operating infrastructure, directly firefighting issues.
- Prototyped initial infrastructure on AWS and collaborated with engineers to design a flexible architecture that could react to the fast-moving requiremenets of live virtual events. Shifted from a brittle, manually managed system to a flexible infra-as-code strategy using terraform. Cut down the time to scale infrastructure up or down from multiple days to hours, reducing operational costs by 50%.
- Starting as a senior software engineer, implemented automated payment systems with Stripe in Go & Javascript on the Artery platform before transitioning into a leadership role.

---

#### Toptal - Contract Software Engineer _<small>Sep 2016 – Ongoing</small>_

- Architected earthquake detection systems for Rio Tinto's Mongolian mine Oyu Tolgoi, one of the largest mines in the world
  - Worked directly with seismologists and on-site personel to build python pipelines deployed on kubernetes
- Drove the creation of a new revenue stream for juice bar chain PureGreen, working full stack to build a user-facing system to create, manage, and execute subscriptions.
  - Used django, react, and redux. Integrated directly with payment provider and distribution partner
  - https://www.puregreen.com
- Implemented data collection systems for financial analysis product wavebasis and integrated payment provider for subscriptions

---

#### Airbrake.io - Software Engineer _<small>Sep 2016 – Jan 2018</small>_

- Worked in Go improving and maintaining distributed systems code that accepted and ingested large quantites (~10 mill/day data points) of error data. 
- Built front facing features in Javascript and Typescript using AngularJS, focused on improving user flows linking error data to deploys.

---

#### Sozo App - Technical Lead _<small>Apr 2016 – Aug 2016</small>_
- Built web scraping infrastructure collecting product data from various grocery providers 
- Managed development efforts from other contractors and integrated resulting work 
- Developed integrations for operational tooling, including error, metrics and log management solutions.

---

#### AppMonsta - Distributed System Engineer _<small>Sep 2015 – Mar 2016</small>_
- Built spark (python) pipelines processing > 200 million unique data points per day 
- Improved and maintained high performance python web spiders scraping > 1 million items a day

---

#### Spring Inc. - Contract Software Engineer _<small>Mar 2015 – May 2015</small>_
Helped the company scale their web scraping infrastructure by building critical components with golang

---

#### Rockpool Labs - Engineer _<small>Sep 2014 – Jan 2015</small>_
- Worked with golang on google app engine building high performance, auto-scaling services 
- Built out core service libraries, including logging, error handling and others critical componentry

---

#### Aston Club - Senior Software Engineer _<small>Nov 2013 – Sep 2014</small>_
- Initiated and won internal support for a set of nodejs-based software development best practises that minimised duplication of work. This became the lynch-pin for the refactoring of internal code and a key part of the company's plans to tackle problems of scale.
- Championed a complete switch in infrastructure management to ansible, re-writing deployment, testing, and development procedures to increase productivity.
- Played a part in developing a custom auto-updater in C# and .NET, getting up to speed quickly with the evil land of microsoft (perhaps learning it's not so evil). 
- Developed a new POS integration that increased the total number of active venues (at the time) by 10%.
- Wrote a communications library to drastically simplify the methods of inter-service message routing through message brokers (Rabbitmq).

---

#### Self-Employed - Contractor _<small>Apr 2013 – Nov 2013</small>_
- Used nodejs and raspberry pis to develop a prototype for a startup looking to improve communications/analysis of hockey players and coaches. This helped them raise $75k in initial funding.
- Built a Ruby-based administration tool for developers and surfaced valuable information about users/systems for an education-based startup.
- Prototyped the frontend (angularjs) for a startup optimising the renovation process.
- Built out a carousel style view component (js/html/css) with heavy backbone usage.
- Converted a phonegap-based app to a native iOS app.

---

#### Better Place Australia - Software Developer (Co-op) _<small>May 2012 – Jul 2012</small>_
- Prototyped an IOS application to give the company's customers direct feedback about the Better Place Network
- Designed and built the early mobile client API for communicating with the Better Place Network, utilizing the Typesafe stack, Salesforce, and MongoDB.
- Improved and maintained internal tools that directly affected the workflow of employees testing devices in the field.

---

#### Electronic Arts - Software Developer (Co-op) _<small>Sep 2011 – Dec 2011</small>_
- Worked closely in a team of developers, artists, and economists to develop "Trouble Makers", an iphone game that was played by tens of thousands of users.
- Contributed to all layers of the application, from server to UI to tools.
- Added new features, fixed bugs, and pushed development towards a polished finished product.
- Worked with Unity 3d and C# on the client end in addition to Java on the backend.
- http://www.ea.com/trouble-makers-ios

---

#### Reindeer Flotilla - Founder and Sole Developer _<small>Jan 2011 – Apr 2011</small>_
- Founded a small business creating flash games for the web. 
- Led a remote team of 5 people across 9 time zones to build Sapphire Skies, an action game with stragic elements that has been played 9,400 times to date.
- Coded all elements of the game, from UI to backend, integrating open source technology.
- Utilized a small test group to make informed improvements based on analytics.
- http://www.kongregate.com/games/zachgold/sapphire-skies

---

#### Hitgrab Inc - Games Developer (Co-op) _<small>May 2010 – Sep 2010</small>_
- Helped to drive the conceptualization, development and analysis of a flash based facebook game. 
- Contributed to all layers of application, creating code on the PHP-based backend and the Actionscript frontend.
- Got up to speed with PHP and acted to rapidly help meet goals when a lack of backend resources created a bottleneck in development.

---

#### Fantasy Interactive - Interactive Development Intern (Co-op) _<small>Sep 2009 – Dec 2009</small>_
- Worked alongside seasoned industry experts on projects for major clients (Electronic Arts and Burton).
- Created CSS and HTML widgets that formed the basis of a community-based portal website.
- Brainstormed and designed wireframes that were used to create the Kontain (FI’s home-grown social network) iphone app. 
- Worked in Flash to rapidly create an application for Burton Snowboards that would interactively reveal portion of a map with smoothly animated movements.

---

#### Research In Motion - Prototype Software Developer (Co-op) _<small>May 2009 – Aug 2009</small>_
- Architected the front-end development of a major conceptual prototype intended to explore new uses of advanced user interfaces. 
- Worked closely with a team of hardware engineers, graphic designers, and industrial designers to develop software to create a cutting-edge product concept.

---

#### DesignAxiom Ltd. - Software Developer (Co-op) _<small>Sep 2008 – Dec 2008</small>_
- Learnt an in-house flash development framework and applied knowledge to contribute major deliverables in the development of a complex flex application for a pharmaceutical analytics company.
- Contributed to an intricate flex application in the children’s entertainment sector. 
- Created JSFL scripts to simplify animation tasks and solve interaction problems between animations and the flex application. 
- Added features to a a desktop-based educational video player 
- Fixed bugs with a facebook-based flash game.

---

#### Autodesk - Software Developer (Co-op) _<small>Jan 2008 – May 2008</small>_
- Created a java-based web tool for a project management system that increased usability and saved employees considerable amounts of time each day. 
- Gained experience with administration of the perforce source control system. 
- Created python scripts to automate processes in perforce.
